[Hibernate]: Hibernate documentation (#2670)
ydb-platform/ydb: ydb/docs/en/core/integrations/hibernate.md

# {{ ydb-short-name }} dialect for Hibernate #

## Overview {#overview}

> This is a guide to using Hibernate with YDB.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a guide to using [Hibernate](https://hibernate.org/) with {{ ydb-short-name }}.
```

> Hibernate is an Object-Relational Mapping (ORM) framework for Java that facilitates the mapping of object-oriented models. Each database management system (DBMS) partially implements the SQL standard, interpreting certain constructs in its own way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hibernate is an Object-Relational Mapping (ORM) framework for Java that facilitates the mapping of object-oriented models to SQL. Each database management system (DBMS) partially implements the SQL standard, interpreting certain constructs in its own way. This article describes the specifics of how {{ ydb-short-name }} integrates with Hibernate.
```

## Installation {#install-dialect}

Add the following dependency to your project:

{% list tabs %}

- Maven

    ```xml
    <dependency>
        <groupId>tech.ydb.dialects</groupId>
        <artifactId>hibernate-ydb-dialect</artifactId>

>         <!-- Set actual version -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        <!-- Set an actual version -->
```

        <version>${hibernate.ydb.dialect.version}</version> 
    </dependency>
    ```

- Gradle

    ```groovy
    dependencies {

>         implementation 'tech.ydb.dialects:hibernate-ydb-dialect:$version' // Set actual version

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        implementation 'tech.ydb.dialects:hibernate-ydb-dialect:$version' // Set an actual version
```

    }
    ```

{% endlist %}

> If you use Hibernate version 5, you need `<artifactId>hibernate-ydb-dialect-v5</artifactId>`.

Reviewer: This looks like it belongs to the "Maven" tab above + it needs a Gradle equivalent.

## Configuration {#configuration-dialect}

> Configure Hibernate to use the custom YDB dialect by updating your hibernate.cfg.xml:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Configure Hibernate to use the custom {{ ydb-short-name }} dialect by updating your hibernate.cfg.xml file:
```

```xml
<property name="hibernate.dialect">tech.ydb.hibernate.dialect.YdbDialect</property>
```

Or, if you are using programmatic configuration:

```java
public static Configuration basedConfiguration() {
    return new Configuration()
            .setProperty(AvailableSettings.DRIVER, YdbDriver.class.getName())
            .setProperty(AvailableSettings.DIALECT, YdbDialect.class.getName());
}
```

## Usage {#using}

Use this custom dialect just like any other Hibernate dialect. Map your entity classes to database tables and use Hibernate's session factory to perform database operations.

> ### Example Spring Data JPA

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Example with Spring Data JPA
```

> Configure Spring Data JPA with Hibernate to use custom YDB dialect by updating your application.properties:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Configure [Spring Data JPA](https://spring.io/projects/spring-data-jpa/) with Hibernate to use custom YDB dialect by updating your application.properties:
```

```properties
spring.jpa.properties.hibernate.dialect=tech.ydb.hibernate.dialect.YdbDialect

spring.datasource.driver-class-name=tech.ydb.jdbc.YdbDriver

> spring.datasource.url=jdbc:ydb:grpc://localhost:2136/local

Reviewer: Replace specific host/port/database with placeholders and explain how to fill them.

Also, afaik there's a bunch of other optional properties that could be included in this URL, it would be useful to highlight it as well. For instance, are they the recommended way to handle authentication, or there are better options?

Author: We need to refer to our future JDBC documentation at this point .

```

Create simple entity and repository:

```kotlin
@Entity
@Table(name = "employee")
data class Employee(
    @Id

>     val id: Long,

Reviewer: This article needs a table with full mapping between supported Hibernate's data types and YDB/YQL data types

    @Column(name = "full_name")
    val fullName: String,

    @Column
    val email: String,

    @Column(name = "hire_date")
    val hireDate: LocalDate,

    @Column
    val salary: java.math.BigDecimal,

    @Column(name = "is_active")
    val isActive: Boolean,

    @Column
    val department: String,

    @Column
    val age: Int,
)

interface EmployeeRepository : CrudRepository<Employee, Long>

fun EmployeeRepository.findByIdOrNull(id: Long): Employee? = this.findById(id).orElse(null)
```

Example using:

```kotlin
val employee = Employee(
    1,
    "Kirill Kurdyukov",
    "kurdyukov-kir@ydb.tech",
    LocalDate.parse("2023-12-20"),
    BigDecimal("500000.000000000"),
    true,
    "YDB AppTeam",
    23
)

employeeRepository.save(employee)

assertEquals(employee, employeeRepository.findByIdOrNull(employee.id))

employeeRepository.delete(employee)

assertNull(employeeRepository.findByIdOrNull(employee.id))

> ```

Reviewer: needs more examples, like how to add/remove columns, indexes, change table settings, etc.

## Installation {#install-dialect}

Add the following dependency to your project:

{% list tabs %}

- Maven

    ```xml
    <!-- Set an actual versions -->
    <dependency>
        <groupId>tech.ydb.jdbc</groupId>
        <artifactId>ydb-jdbc-driver</artifactId>
        <version>${ydb.jdbc.version}</version>
    </dependency>

    <dependency>
        <groupId>tech.ydb.dialects</groupId>
        <artifactId>hibernate-ydb-dialect</artifactId>
        <version>${hibernate.ydb.dialect.version}</version> 
    </dependency>
    ```

- Gradle

    ```groovy
    dependencies {
        // Set an actual versions
        implementation "tech.ydb.dialects:hibernate-ydb-dialect:$ydbDialectVersion"
        implementation "tech.ydb.jdbc:ydb-jdbc-driver:$ydbJdbcVersion"
    }
    ```

{% endlist %}

If you use Hibernate version 5, you need `<artifactId>hibernate-ydb-dialect-v5</artifactId>` for Maven or `implementation 'tech.ydb.dialects:hibernate-ydb-dialect-v5:$version` for Gradle.

> ## Configuration {#configuration-dialect}

Reviewer: The part about configuring the connection to YDB seems to be missing (endpoint, authentication, etc.).

| `double`, `Double`                                                  | `Double`                    |
| `float`, `Float`                                                    | `Float`                     |
| `int`, `java.lang.Integer`                                          | `Int32`                     |
| `long`, `java.lang.Long`                                            | `Int64`                     |
| `short`, `java.lang.Short`                                          | `Int16`                     |
| `byte`, `java.lang.Byte`, enum with `@Enumerated(EnumType.ORDINAL)` | `Int8`                      |
| `[]byte`                                                            | `Bytes`  (synonym `String`) |
| `java.time.LocalDateTime`                                           | `Datetime`                  |
| `java.time.Instant`                                                 | `Timestamp`                 |

Database schema generation based on hibernate entities is supported.

For example, for the Group class:

```java
@Getter
@Setter
@Entity
@Table(name = "Groups", indexes = @Index(name = "group_name_index", columnList = "GroupName"))
@NamedQuery(
        name = "Group.findGroups",

>         query = "SELECT g FROM Group g " +

Author: It is HQL, I deleted this block

                "JOIN Plan p ON g.id = p.planId.groupId " +
                "JOIN Lecturer l ON p.planId.lecturerId = l.id " +
                "WHERE p.planId.courseId = :CourseId and l.id = :LecturerId"
)
public class Group {

    @Id
    @Column(name = "GroupId")
    private int id;
  
    @Column(name = "GroupName")
    private String name;
  
    @OneToMany(mappedBy = "group")

>     private List<Student> students;

Reviewer: It needs to be clarified why this field is here but not in any of the generated SQL below.

  
    @Override
    public int hashCode() {
      return id;
    }
}
```

> The following `Groups` table will be created and a secondary index, `group_name_index`, will be added to the `GroupName` column:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following `Groups` table will be created, and the `GroupName` will be indexed by a global secondary index named `group_name_index`:
```

```sql
create table Groups (
    GroupId Int32 not null,
    GroupName Text,
    primary key (GroupId)
);

alter table Groups
  add index group_name_index global 
       on (GroupName);
```

If you evolve the Group entity by adding the `deparment` field:

```java
@Column
private String department;
```

> Hibernate, at the start of the application, update the database schema if the `update` mode is set:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the start of the application, Hibernate will update the database schema if the `update` mode is set in properties:
```

```properties
jakarta.persistence.schema-generation.database.action=update
```

> The result of changing the scheme is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The result of changing the schema is:
```

```sql
alter table Groups 
   add column department Text
```

> {% note warning %}
> 
> Hibernate is not designed to manage database schemas.
> 
> {% endnote %}
> 
> {% note info %}
> 
> You can use [Liquibase](./liquibase.md) or Flyway to manage your database schema.
> 
> {% endnote %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% note info %}

Hibernate is not designed to manage database schemas. You can manage your database schema using [Liquibase](./liquibase.md) or Flyway.

{% endnote %}
```

### Example with Spring Data JPA

Configure [Spring Data JPA](https://spring.io/projects/spring-data-jpa/) with Hibernate to use custom {{ ydb-short-name }} dialect by updating your `application.properties`:

```properties
spring.jpa.properties.hibernate.dialect=tech.ydb.hibernate.dialect.YdbDialect

spring.datasource.driver-class-name=tech.ydb.jdbc.YdbDriver
spring.datasource.url=jdbc:ydb:<grpc/grpcs>://<host>:<2135/2136>/path/to/database[?saFile=file:~/sa_key.json]
```

> Create simple entity and repository:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a simple entity and repository:
```

> ```kotlin

Reviewer: Why does it switch from Java to Kotlin here? Ideally, we could provide all examples for both languages in tabs.

Scala would be nice, too, but it doesn't have to be part of this PR.

Reviewer: @KirillKurdyukov I still don't understand this

Author: I chose Kotlin as an examples

@Entity
@Table(name = "employee")
data class Employee(
    @Id
    val id: Long,

    @Column(name = "full_name")
    val fullName: String,

    @Column
    val email: String,

    @Column(name = "hire_date")
    val hireDate: LocalDate,

    @Column
    val salary: java.math.BigDecimal,

    @Column(name = "is_active")
    val isActive: Boolean,

    @Column
    val department: String,

    @Column
    val age: Int,
)

interface EmployeeRepository : CrudRepository<Employee, Long>

fun EmployeeRepository.findByIdOrNull(id: Long): Employee? = this.findById(id).orElse(null)
```

> Example using:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Usage example:
```

```kotlin
val employee = Employee(
    1,
    "Example",
    "example@bk.com",
    LocalDate.parse("2023-12-20"),
    BigDecimal("500000.000000000"),
    true,
    "YDB AppTeam",
    23
)

> employeeRepository.save(employee)

Reviewer: Let's add comments showing which YQL queries are executed here.

```properties
spring.jpa.properties.hibernate.dialect=tech.ydb.hibernate.dialect.YdbDialect

spring.datasource.driver-class-name=tech.ydb.jdbc.YdbDriver
spring.datasource.url=jdbc:ydb:<grpc/grpcs>://<host>:<2135/2136>/path/to/database[?saFile=file:~/sa_key.json]
```

Create a simple entity and repository:

```kotlin
@Entity
@Table(name = "employee")
data class Employee(
    @Id
    val id: Long,

    @Column(name = "full_name")
    val fullName: String,

    @Column
    val email: String,

    @Column(name = "hire_date")
    val hireDate: LocalDate,

    @Column
    val salary: java.math.BigDecimal,

    @Column(name = "is_active")
    val isActive: Boolean,

    @Column
    val department: String,

    @Column
    val age: Int,
)

interface EmployeeRepository : CrudRepository<Employee, Long>

fun EmployeeRepository.findByIdOrNull(id: Long): Employee? = this.findById(id).orElse(null)
```

Usage example:

```kotlin
val employee = Employee(
    1,
    "Example",
    "example@bk.com",
    LocalDate.parse("2023-12-20"),
    BigDecimal("500000.000000000"),
    true,
    "YDB AppTeam",
    23
)

> /* SQL will be executed: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
/* The following SQL will be executed: 
```

INSERT INTO employee (age,department,email,full_name,hire_date,is_active,limit_date_password,salary,id) 
VALUES (?,?,?,?,?,?,?,?,?) 
*/
employeeRepository.save(employee)

assertEquals(employee, employeeRepository.findByIdOrNull(employee.id))

> /* SQL will be executed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
/* The following SQL will be executed:
```

> ## Hibernate dialect ##

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## YDB dialect for Hibernate ##
```
